The President:  Thank you
very much.
I very much appreciate it.
I’ll be heading to Alabama
on Friday.
So I think some of you
will be joining me,
but we’ll be going down Friday.
And we’ll let you know times
and when we’re leaving,
and how long we’ll be there.
It’s been a tragic situation,
but a lot of good work
is being done.
And we’ve been in constant
touch with the Governor,
and also the Governor
of Georgia.
And so we’ll be
going to the area.
We’ll be — Alabama
and the general area.
We’ll see Governor Ivey.
So that’ll be on Friday.
Thank you very much.
And we’re here today
to confront a solemn crisis
that requires urgent
national action.
In a few moments, I will sign
an executive order addressing
one of our nation’s
most heartbreaking
tragedies:
veteran suicide.
Our mission is to mobilize
every level of American society
to save the lives
of our great veterans
and support our heroes in need.
We’ve worked very hard on Choice
for the veterans
and so many other programs,
and done a really great job
in so many ways.
Veteran suicide is something
that’s been an incredible thing
to watch —
hard to believe. It’s tragic.
Today we can help end
this crisis.
I would like to thank
Secretary Wilkie
for being here today with us.
He has done a fantastic job
as Secretary.
He is making tremendous
progress at the VA.
We are also profoundly grateful
to be joined
by many of our nation’s leading
veteran service organizations —
the best — and all of the state
and local veteran leaders.
And I want to thank everybody
very much for being here.
Thank you very much.
Thank you all very much.
I know how hard
you’ve been working on this.
Veteran suicide is a tragedy
of staggering proportions.
Hard to believe an average
of 20 veterans
and service members take
their lives every single day.
Who would believe
that’s possible?
There are more than 6,000
veteran suicides per year.
The suicide rate among veterans
is 1.5 times greater
than that
for non-veteran adults,
and the suicide rate
for post-9/11 soldiers
has increased significantly over
the last ten-year period.
To every veteran: I want you
to know
that you have an entire nation
of more than 300 million
people behind you.
You will never,
ever be forgotten.
We are with you all the way.
I think you know that.
Supporting veterans is a very,
very important thing to me.
And it’s been very important —
from my campaign, from day one,
and from before my campaign —
but from day one.
Supporting veterans in distress
is a critical priority
for our entire administration —
everybody in the administration.
Last year, I signed into law
the largest funding bill
for the VA in its history,
which included $8.6 billion
for veterans
in mental health services.
I also signed
an executive order
directing the Department
of Defense,
Veteran Affairs,
and Homeland Security
to ensure our veterans
have seamless access
to mental health care and
suicide prevention resources.
These efforts focus
on veterans the first year
after they separate
from military service
when they are
at the heightened-risk area.
The White House VA hotline has
fielded more than 200,000 calls
and successfully resolved
93 percent
of the concerns
our veterans brought to them.
And they work very hard.
It’s been very, very effective.
We secured $206 million for VA
suicide prevention programming.
Every VA medical center now
offers same-day
emergency mental health care.
These are crucial steps,
but unfortunately most veterans
who die by suicide have not been
in the care of the VA.
Many of them don’t know
about the programs that we have
or the programs
that we’ve instituted.
In fact, nearly 70 percent
of those lost to suicide
have not received care
from the VA
in the previous two years.
They’re just not aware
of those great strides.
They’re just not aware.
It’s just not something
that’s on their mind.
This grave problem can only be
solved
if our entire country works
together to build communities
that truly serve, support,
and protect our veterans
from the first moment
they return to civilian life.
It’s so different.
They leave a military life
and they go to civilian life,
and it’s just much different.
We must keep our promises
to those who keep us free.
Through today’s action,
I am launching the PREVENTS
Initiative — “The President’s
Roadmap to Empower Veterans
and End the National Tragedy
of Suicide”.
This order creates a new
Cabinet-level task force
co-chaired by Secretary Wilkie.
The task force will create
a comprehensive,
national public health roadmap
that brings together
federal and local government,
along with private
sector partners,
to improve the quality of life
for our veterans
and turn the tide
on this terrible crisis.
We’re being helped greatly
by our strong economy.
Our economy is very,
very powerful
and makes it a lot easier
for people to get jobs,
including veterans.
And a lot of companies
are actually giving priority,
at our request,
to veterans
and they’re very happy
with the results.
The task force will be charged
with developing
a national research strategy
so that we can more effectively
identify, intervene,
and help veterans
during a time of need.
By investing in research
and scientific advances,
we can better understand the
trauma our brave soldiers face
and how to restore their faith
and their health.
Under this order,
my administration
will also work with Congress
to pass legislation providing
resources and assistance
in the form of grants
to communities
so that they can
empower veterans
with critical information,
services,
and networks
of total, total support.
We’re going to take care
of our veterans.
We’re working so hard on this.
We’re making so much progress
and we’re going to take care
of them like never before.
Veterans are America’s
greatest national treasure
and a lot of people
understand that;
some people don’t.
I will tell you,
our single-greatest
national treasure.
They kept us safe and we’re
going to keep them safe.
They courageously fulfill
their duties to our nation.
Now we must fulfill
our duties to them.
Here with us today
is Frank Larkin.
His son, Ryan,
followed in his footsteps
to become a Navy SEAL.
Terrific, terrific young man.
Tragically,
Ryan is no longer with us.
Frank, we’d love
to have you come up
and just say a few words
about your great son, please.
Frank.
Mr. Larkin:  Thank you,
Mr. President.
And thank you to our warriors
and veterans present today;
along with the veterans
service organizations —
our partners who
are working hard every day
to make a difference for
our veterans who are in need;
to the other government
leaders here today;
and to the survivors of suicide
who live every day with the pain
from the loss
of their loved one.
Ryan was a decorated
high-performing Navy SEAL
who suddenly went
over the edge.
In the two years
that we tried to rescue him,
he was prescribed
over 40 different drugs.
His treatment
was all psychiatric-
and behavioral-health focused.
All along, Ryan kept saying
that something was wrong
with his head,
but nobody was listening.
Months before he took his life,
he expressed a wish to donate
his body for TBI research.
Ryan was concerned
about his teammates
and the similar struggles
that they were experiencing
following both training
for combat
and combat operations overseas.
Many are burdened
with invisible wounds
as a consequence
of going into harm’s way
into the service
of this nation.
After Ryan’s death,
we learned that he suffered
from an undiagnosed,
severe level
of microscopic brain injury
uniquely related
to military blast exposure
from firing our weapons systems,
rockets, mortars,
using explosive
breaching charges,
and being exposed to improvised
explosive devices — IEDs.
We are currently challenged
by the fact
that this newly discovered
pattern of brain injury
cannot be seen
in a living person —
not unlike the contact
sport players
who are trying to understand
the effects of microscopic CTE,
which also cannot be seen
in a living player.
This executive order is defining
a national strategy
that needs to resemble
a Manhattan-like Project.
We need the science
to illuminate our path forward.
I am convinced
that we can solve this.
It is not because we lack
the intellectual capability
or capacity;
in many cases,
it’s because of culture.
We need all
the relevant players
to step onto the same field
of play at the same time,
completely focused
on solving this problem.
We need collaboration,
integration of data,
and unity of effort across DOD,
the VA,
HHS, DHS, academia,
and the private sector.
We need a holistic approach with
a heightened sense of urgency
to push
the scientific research.
As we develop knowledge —
as we experienced
with the Manhattan
Project and space exploration —
we will inform on other
disease processes
and therapies that will go well
beyond the veteran community
and vice versa.
I receive calls almost weekly
from special operators,
past and present,
seeking help.
They want to know
what is happening to them.
They are experiencing
unexplained changes.
They want to know
if the pain will get better,
if the demons will go away,
if they will return to being
the person they once were.
I have to commend my own
SEAL community
and the Special
Operations Command
for embracing this challenge.
They realized that things
did not go well
in Ryan’s case —
that he got left behind.
They are working hard now
to get it right,
collecting exposure data,
promoting a brain donation
program to advance the research,
increasing baseline
health surveillance,
and changing tactics
to reduce exposures,
especially in the combat
training environment.
We also need to appropriately
recognize invisible wounds
suffered on the battlefield.
The monetary cost of a
Purple Heart award is low —
a few dollars
for the medal itself.
But the emotional impact is very
high to those suffering daily
with these obscure injuries
to be recognized
for their sacrifice.
Mr. President,
following this event
I’m going over to Arlington
National Cemetery to tell Ryan
that he’s still making
a difference,
that he’s still
helping his boys.
We can’t leave any more of our
valiant men and women behind.
To our warriors, our veterans,
and their families:
Please do not lose hope.
We will find a better way.
Remember, we made a promise
to take care of those
who served us.
Failure is not an option.
Mr. President, I thank you
for the platform.
The President:  Very nice.
Thank you.
(Applause.)
Thank you, Frank, very much.
Also here today with us
is Thomas Winkel,
a Marine Corps veteran.
He is the Director
of the Arizona Coalition
for Military Families
and the creator of a nationally
recognized community
collaboration model called
“Be Connected.”
And, Thomas, if I might,
could you please come up
and say a few words?
Thomas.
Mr. Winkel:  Thank you,
Mr. President.
I greatly appreciate
being able to be here
and speak with you all today.
To Frank, I really
appreciate your words.
I’m sorry about your son.
He is in our hearts and you are
in our hearts, your family.
And Semper Fi, brother.
Mr. Larkin:  Thank you.
Mr. Winkel:  Folks, the PREVENTS
Initiative it exactly
what this country needs.
It is exactly
what the thousands —
the tens of thousands
of individuals
across the country
have been hoping for.
For the past 10 years,
I’ve been working with states —
every single state —
across the country.
Local teams, state teams,
federal teams.
And when you boil
everything down —
all their concerns,
all their hopes,
all their dreams,
all their frustrations —
what it really comes down to
is that there needs to be
a sense of coordination
and collaboration
unlike what we have today
and unlike what
we’ve seen before.
We’re not talking about
just regular old coordination
and collaboration,
or a partnership that is
“partnership” in name only.
But we need partnership that
is true, that is consistent,
that allows the organization
to meet both its own metrics
and its altruistic metrics.
It’s incredibly important.
And it’s incredibly valuable.
We have examples of this
true partnership
— little ones,
all across the country.
One from Arizona
happens to be in 2010.
The Arizona National Guard
had its highest rate
of suicide ever.
Very, very difficult situation.
Partners got together
under the leadership
of a collective
impact initiative.
And we all had
the same goal in mind:
How do we reduce this number
or get rid of it completely?
Over the course of 36 months,
we dropped the rate
from the highest ever to zero.
It can be done.
We have the ability
to prevent suicide,
to make lives more empowered,
to make lives have more meaning,
and to be able
to drive folks forward
to feel the success that happens
when they get a great job,
or they get a great spouse,
or they have kids.
Look, the reality is,
is that we’ve all known someone
who has died by suicide.
It is hard. It is painful.
And we have the ability
to stop it.
What our belief is, and the way
that we were able to do this
is that we worked with
a “No Wrong Door”
and “No Wrong Person” approach.
A “No Wrong Door,
No Wrong Person” approach.
That means very single
organization was engaged.
Every single organization
was involved
that had a stake
in service members,
veterans,
and their families,
and their survival
and their thriving.
So we have mechanics,
and lawyers, and doctors,
and teachers,
and first responders.
And we have hotel clerks —
one of my favorite stories
is a hotel clerk that noticed
that a person that was checking
in happened to be a veteran —
that they were struggling
in a variety of different ways.
But the hotel clerk
didn’t know what to do.
He called
what we have in Arizona,
called the “Be Connected” line,
and talked with them.
They coached him
through how do you
just connect
with the individual.
So the clerk goes up
to his room, knocks on the door,
and says, “Hello, sir.
I just wanted
to check in with you.
You seem like you might be
a little distressed
and I wanted to see if there was
anything I could do for you.”
The individual said,
“I’m so glad that you came up.
I’m so glad
that you talked with me
because I was sitting here
contemplating
how I was going to die.
Not ‘whether.’ Not ‘if.’
So you may have
just saved my life.”
We hear these stories
consistently,
and it takes
the entire community
to be able to do this —
everybody working off
the same page.
Our belief is, is that
if everyone knows what to do
when an individual
is in trouble, they will act.
And we’ve seen it time
and time again.
So, Mr. President,
we greatly support this act —
or this initiative.
It is an incredible thing.
We deeply appreciate everything
that you have put into this.
It is going to make
a huge difference.
And I can speak
on behalf of Arizona
and the other states that I have
spoken with that we stand ready.
Thank you.
(Applause.)
The President:  So, Thomas,
I heard one thing
beyond all else
when you just spoke
so beautifully,
and that was “from
the highest rate ever to zero.”
That was a very big statement.
So we’re going to have to
find out what you are doing.
Somebody’s got to get
together with you.
That’s an incredible job.
I’ve heard about it, too.
“Highest rate ever to zero.”
Mr. Winkel:  Thank you,
Mr. President.
The President:  That’s
what it’s about.
That’s what we’re up here for.
There has to be something
that we can do.
Mr. Winkel:  There is.
The President:  Twenty a day?
It’s hard to believe.
So thank you very much.
Come here.
Again, thank you very much.
I’d like to ask a man who’s
really done an incredible job,
before I sign —
Secretary Wilkie —
to step up
and just say a few words.
I’m so happy that
he’s our Secretary.
If you look over
the last fairly long time
now that he has been Secretary,
we’ve had so many good stories
about what’s happening,
generally, at the VA.
We’re extremely of proud
of Choice.
It’s been many,
many decades that
they have been trying to get
Choice, where a veteran
can go out
and see a doctor
if the lines are long.
They don’t have to wait
four days, nine days —
I always say three weeks,
five weeks, ten weeks.
Never get to see a doctor.
People go on line
and they’re not feeling well,
and they end up being terminal
by the time
they get to see a doctor.
And, by the way,
we have great doctors.
I have to say, I’ve heard —
one thing I hear:
We have great doctors in the VA.
A lot of people say
getting there is tough
but, when you see them,
they’re as good
as anybody in the world.
We have great doctors.
But a man who has really
put it all together
is Secretary Wilkie.
So, Secretary,
please say a few words. Please.
Secretary Wilkie:  Thank you,
Mr. President.
I’ve said this to you before,
separate and apart
from the honor of serving
in your administration,
but I am what passes
for an amateur historian.
And there has never been
a campaign or an administration
where the candidate
and the President
put veterans at the centerpiece
of his campaign
and his administration
until you did that.
And as I speak for all of us
who have worn the uniform,
in whatever capacity
we have served,
we can’t thank you enough
for that, sir.
The President:  Thank you
very much.
Thank you, sir.
Secretary Wilkie:  So,
last week,
three Department
of Veterans Affairs
heroes put their lives
on the line
to keep a fellow veteran
from taking his own life.
Dr. Bruce Goldfeder,
Dr. Evelyn Alba,
and hospital technician
Navarone Johnson
in the West Palm Beach
VA Medical Center
risked their lives
to save the life of a veteran.
Two of our VA heroes
were wounded — one severely.
But that veteran lived.
Since 2017, VA employees —
doctors, nurses,
technicians,
policemen —
have saved 243 veterans
just like the one
that our heroes
saved in Palm Beach.
But since 2017,
19 veterans have not been saved.
That is what today’s
ceremony is about.
It is about pulling together
the resources
of the federal government,
our states and localities,
our charities,
our non-governmental
organizations,
and coming together
with a roadmap
and the resources to make sure
that we no longer have those 19.
I have said many times
that the mission
of the Department
of Veterans Affairs
is to remind our fellow citizens
why they sleep soundly at night.
They sleep soundly at night
because of the sacrifices
of a select number
of their fellow Americans
who have taken the affirmative
step to serve in uniform.
Those — as the President said,
those 20 who every day
take their own lives —
14 of them outside
of our VA system,
most of them
from my father’s generation.
His comrades
from Southeast Asia.
We deserve, for them, the last
full measure of our devotion.
And this begins
the closing of that circle.
And, Mr. President, I thank you
and your team
for everything they have done
on behalf of America’s warriors.
Thank you, sir.
The President:  Good job.
Thank you very much.
(Applause.)
This is very important to me
and to everybody here.
Thank you very much.
Where’s Frank?
Here you go, Frank.
Mr. Larkin:  My son’s bracelet.
It’s a symbol
of all the veterans
who have taken their lives.
We’ve got to keep our eye
on the ball.
The President:  Thank you,
Frank.
Thank you very much everybody.
Thank you.
The Press:  Sir, your response
to the Democrats
who are calling
for a criminal investigation
into Jared Kushner’s
security clearance?
The President:  The witch
hunt continues.
The fact is that, I guess,
we got 81 letters.
There was no collusion.
It was a hoax.
There was no anything.
And they want to do that instead
of getting legislation passed.
Eighty-one people
or organizations got letters.
It’s a disgrace.
It’s a disgrace to our country.
I’m not surprised
that it’s happening.
Basically,
they’ve started the campaign.
So the campaign begins.
But the campaign is actually —
their campaign has been going on
for the last two
and a half years.
So it’s a shame.
And the people understand it.
When they look at it,
they just say,
“Presidential harassment.”
But that’s okay.
No administration
has accomplished — probably,
you could say this
with absolute surety —
in the first two years anywhere
near what we have accomplished.
Whether it’s the tax cuts;
whether it’s regulation cuts;
whether it’s the Veterans
Administration —
what we’ve done with
the Veterans Administration
with Choice and so
many other things
that nobody thought
would be possible to get passed;
no administration has done
in its first two years
what the Trump
administration has done.
So what the Democrats want to
do — they cannot stand the loss.
They could not
stand losing in 2016.
I see it all the time.
I see people getting on —
I saw a certain person
get up yesterday.
The anger.
And they just haven’t
gotten used to the fact
that we won a lot of states
that haven’t been won
by Republicans
in a long time.
But essentially what they’re
saying is the campaign begins.
And instead of
doing infrastructure,
instead of doing healthcare,
instead of doing so many things
that they should be doing,
they want to play games.
President Obama,
from what they tell me,
was under a similar
kind of a thing —
didn’t give one letter.
They didn’t do anything.
They didn’t give one letter
of the request.
Many requests were made;
they didn’t give a letter.
It’s too bad because I’d rather
see them do legislation.
We negotiate out legislation.
We have so many things —
actually things that we agreed
on, like infrastructure.
But they want to focus
on nonsense.
So I just want to end
by thanking all of the people
that are in this room today.
Very special people.
The job you’ve done
for the VA is incredible.
And just keep up the good work.
And, Secretary,
you’ve been fantastic.
Thank you very much.
Thank you all.